I got called out for one of my videos,
and if I'm being honest, I understand
why. In the video, I said that Thor's
456 kg elephant bar deadlift at the 2024
Arnold was the smoothest and strongest
1,000 lb raw deadlift ever performed. In
the comments, a bunch of people
disagreed and said that Benedikt
Magnússon's 1,015 lb world record
deadlift was way better. So, let's break
this down properly. In 2011, Benedikt
Magnússon became the first human to
deadlift over 1,000 lb raw under
powerlifting rules. This means no
lifting straps, no deadlift suit, judged
under strict powerlifting standards. A
belt is still allowed, that's still
considered raw. And to this day, no one
has lifted more than 1,015 lb with bare
hands and conventional technique in
powerlifting competition. People have
done more with sumo, but are we really
counting sumo? Let me know in the
comments. Now, when I referred to Thor's
456 kg deadlift at the 2024 Arnold, I
said it was the smoothest and strongest
raw conventional 1,000 lb deadlift ever
performed. I'm not saying it was more
iconic than Benedikt's lift, Benedikt
wins that. But looking at the lift in
isolation with no history, no ego, and
no emotion, I stand by what I said. But
before we compare the lifts, we need
clarity on the record landscape because
this is where most of the confusion
comes from. The strongman world record
is 510 kg. Thorbjörnsson owns that. That
is under strongman rules, which allow
lifting straps and a deadlift suit.
Hitching is also allowed, although Thor
didn't hitch his 510. The raw
powerlifting world record is 487.5 kg by
Dan Grigsby in 2022. That was sumo. If
we separate conventional from sumo,
which many purists do, then the raw
conventional powerlifting record is
still Benedikt Magnússon's 1,015 lb or
460.5 kg deadlift from 2011. Now, let's
talk about the Arnolds. At the Arnold
Strongman Classic, suits are not
allowed. Straps are allowed. By
Strongman standards, that's still
considered raw. But, there's another
variable, the elephant bar. It's longer
and thicker than a standard deadlift
bar, and they use thicker plates. That
means the barbell bends more. People
argue about whether that makes it easier
or harder, and that's why the elephant
bar records are often treated separately
from standard barbell deadlift records.
It's interesting to note that all the
best deadlifters in the world have
deadlifted more weight when they use the
regular deadlift bar than with the
elephant bar, which by the way, Thor
owns that world record, too, which is
474.5 kg. Now, let's come back to the
456 kg lift at the 2024 Arnold. This was
Thor's first major Strongman competition
back after 3 years away from boxing
Eddie Hall. No one knew what to expect.
456 kg was his second attempt, and the
weight selection was a logical second
attempt to set himself up to break his
own world record of 474.5
if he needed to. Thor absolutely smoked
his 456 or 1,005 lb, and the next best
was Bobby Thompson with 436 kg, and then
Misho with 431 kg, and they were at
their limit. Thor looked like he had
more than 20 kg left in the tank. Now,
when it comes to competition strategy,
if you've done enough to win the event,
it can be a huge waste of energy to take
an even heavier attempt when you've
already claimed first place. At the
Arnolds, the deadlift event is the first
event of the competition, and there's
still five more events to go, and saving
energy wherever possible is a smart
thing to do. So, no, it wasn't a world
record. So, it wasn't given much
attention. And in fact, these days, if
Thor does anything less than 500 kg now,
people think he's underperformed because
I don't understand the context of the
lift. Now, I'm not taking anything away
from Beany. His 1,015 lb deadlift was
iconic. Bare hands, deadlift bar, 2011.
No one had done it before, not even in
strongman with straps and a suit. And it
was heavier than Thor's lift that I'm
talking about here by 4.5 kg. It changed
history. But if you put both lifts side
by side, remove the emotion, you can
decide for yourself which one looks
stronger. But I didn't just make this
video to see who's better. I love to
analyze lifting techniques at the
highest level. And people often say that
everyone comes in different shapes and
sizes, so there shouldn't be a set of
universal deadlift cues that everyone
should follow because everyone is
different. And I understand this.
However, I often say that the main cues
are the same, but the way they present
will be slightly different from lifter
to lifter. So let's see this in action
and learn from the techniques used by
the best conventional deadlifters on the
planet. First, stance. I typically cue
hip width. If you compare the two, Benni
stands slightly wider. But Benni weighed
around 170 kg at the time and is about 6
ft tall. Thor was around 190 kg and 6 ft
9. Proportionally, Benni has wider hips
and thicker thighs relative to height.
So a slightly wider stance made sense.
But in both cases, it allows them to
grip the bar with the arms hanging
straight down. This is the most
efficient grip width possible. Any wider
and the bar has to travel further. So
let's talk about the rolling technique.
This is a lot more common amongst the
super heavyweight lifters because they
have such thick cores that it makes it
difficult to start with a barbell close
to their body. But if you're not massive
like these guys, I recommend starting
with the barbell in line with the
midfoot, which is the exact position
that the bar will leave the ground with
max deadlifting. The bar will only leave
the ground when it's directly over the
center of your base of support, or in
other words, the midfoot. Starting there
is the most precise and repeatable
strategy. Rolling introduces
variability, and it can be hit and miss.
These guys are the exception because
they're massive humans and they can't
get in the perfect position without
rolling it in. Plus, they've practiced
this technique thousands of times, so
they're very good at it. But from here,
there's a slight difference in strategy
with Thor and Benni. You can see that
Benni is more explosive and Thor is
being more controlled. Both strategies
work. I prefer the more precise and
controlled approach. Benni's
explosiveness interfered with his
precision. He sits a little too deep
into the squat and that puts the shins
forward in the way of the vertical bar
path. So, what happens? The hips shoot
up slightly early to get his shins out
of the way before the bar fully comes
off the ground. Benni's lift was more
explosive off the ground, but it changed
his position and slowed down his
lockout. Honestly, I'm absolutely
nitpicking. I'm comparing two of the
best deadlifters the world has ever
seen, but something that I've learned is
even the best in the world have
imperfections, especially with maximal
lifts. And to show you what I'm talking
about, let's have a look at Thor's
approach. He's more controlled. He
slowly rolls the bar in, sets his hips
to the right depth, and the moment the
bar gently touches his shins, it's his
cue to push. People mistake that as
slower. It's not slower, it's precise.
And precision is why his lockout is so
dominant. And even though it appears to
be less explosive, he completes his
deadlift in more than half a second
quicker than Benni. Slow is smooth,
smooth is fast. Now, let's talk about
what's happening through the upper body.
When they roll the bar in, they're
extending their shoulder joint. And the
muscle that extends the shoulder joint
is the lats. You can engage the lats
without rolling the bar, but the fact
that they are rolling the bar towards
the body shows us that the shoulder
joint is extending and that guarantees
that the lats are doing this. The
biggest telltale that the lats aren't on
is if the bar drifts forward from the
body. And when the bar drifts forward,
the spine usually follows and starts
looking like a dog doing a poo. Not
ideal when you're maxing out in a
deadlift. Next, look at their arms. Both
lifters lock their elbows and actively
reach down. Two major advantages. First,
it lengthens the arms, which reduces the
range of motion. And second, it protects
the biceps. Bicep tears commonly occur
in the supinated side of a mixed grip
because supination increases biceps
tension. That means it's less of a
concern for Thor because he's wearing
lifting straps and both hands are
pronated. But for powerlifters, people
consider the mixed grip dangerous for
this reason. But Benni is showing us
clearly that with good technique, you
can do it without harming the bicep.
I've actually spoken to Benni about this
and he's told me that he actively
extends his elbow by flexing his triceps
hard. This is known as reciprocal
inhibition. When one muscle contracts,
the opposing muscle relaxes. So, by
aggressively contracting the triceps,
the biceps are neurologically encouraged
to relax, reducing unnecessary tension
in the tendon. Next, head position. The
cue that I teach is to reach the crown
of the head towards the ceiling, not
just looking up, lengthening the spine.
Imagine someone lifting your entire body
weight by your skull. Now, combine that
with reaching your arms down and pulling
the bar into your body and a breath hold
on top. That creates a full body brace
capable of handling extreme loads. Both
Thor and Benni execute this
exceptionally well. These cues are all
about getting the body in the strongest
and most precise start position. And
once this is achieved, the final cue is
to drive with the legs through the
ground, pushing the world away with
maximum leg drive until they're standing
completely vertical with the knees
locked out and the hips pushed through
to complete the lock out of the
deadlift. Now, you're looking at two
very different humans. Benedikt
Magnusson, 6' Thor Björnsson, 6'9.
Different builds, different aggression
strategies, but when it comes to lifting
the most weight possible with a
conventional deadlift, the similarities
far outweigh the differences. Success
leaves clues, and if you're trying to
improve your conventional deadlift,
follow the cues used by the best in the
world. And if you want to follow the
same programming strategy that Thor
uses, click the link here and you can
access Thor's 12-week deadlifting
program as well as so many more programs
to get you as strong as possible.